Reading at the end

1a. Aeneas
Once upon a time there was an ancient city which was named Troy.
This city was beseiged by the Greeks for 10 years, then they destroyed the city.
Priam, the king, and his sons
; when Aeneas had gathered refugees from all parts he decided to migrate to Italy.
After 7 years he came in the part of Italy where the city of the Laurentines.
Here, after the Trojans lead the cows from the fields, Latinus, the king, and the natives who were holding the places, they prepared to defend the fields.
1b.
But Latinus, after realizing in colloqium the origen of the mass and their leaded, he made peace with Aeneas and gave his daughter to him in marriage.
The Trojans founded a city, which Aeneas called it Lavinium, from the name of his wife.
Then Turnus, the king of Rutulians, to whom Lavinia had been engaged before the arrival of Aeneas, attacked the Trojans and Latinus by means of war.
The Rutuli had been conquered, but the conquerors let the leader Latinus go.
Then Turnes
; to him they, fearing the growth of the city in number of people and resources, brought help happily.
Aeneas, in such a crisis that he held the Aborigines and Trojans under the same law and same name, called each tribe Latins.
1c.
Although he was able to defend against the Etruscans using his walls, still he led out his troops in battle.
The Etruscans were conquered; nevertheless the winners let go of the leader as before; for after the fight they were not able to find Aeneas
Therefore, many believe he went toward god.

2.
Then Lavinia ruled while Ascanius, son of Aeneas, grew up.
Then because of the overflowing Lavinian population that one gave up the city to the mother;
he himself founded another new city at the foot of Mount Alba, which was called Alba Longa.
Many kings carried out the Albanian empire after Ascanius.
One of them, the name was to him Proca, he had two sons, Numitor and Amulius.
To Numitor, who was older, was left the kingship.
However, because he beat his brother, Amulius ruled.
He killed the son of his brother; the daughter Rhea Silvia by pretense of honor chose [to be] a vestal priest.

3a.
From that daughter two sons were born, Romulus and Remus.
Their father, as is the legend, was the god Mars.
But neither the gods nor men defended the mother and boys against the cruelty of the king.
The priestess was given into custody; the king ordered the boys to be thrown into the Tiber.
By chance, the Tiber overflowed, and those who carried the boys were not able to approach the deep water.
And so, they placed the boys in a basket and they abandoned them in the shallow water.
But the basket stayed on dry land.
Then a thirsty female wolf, thus is given, coming out of the mountains, which are around, turned toward the crying of the boys.
Faustulus, a royal shepherd, found her while she was feeding the boys.
And so by him and his wife Larentia the boys were brought up.

3b.
As soon as they grew up, they began to hunt and make attacks against robbers burdened with cattle and to divide among the shepherds the cattle.
While a certain strange thing was being celebrated, the angry theives on account of lost cattle, made an attack against Romulus and Remus;
They handed over the captive Remus to the king Amulius.
They were complaining that the boys led the cattle out of the field of Numitor.
This is how Remus was given to Numitor for punishment.

3c.

5a.
Now, the Roman state was strong and equal with respect to their neighbors.
But the Romans had neither wives nor the right of marriage with their neighbors.
Then, Romulus sent certain ambassadors from the senators into the neighboring clan who would seek an alliance and marriage for a new population.
    relative clause of purpose
The ambassadors were heard kindly nowhere; for the neighbors not only were rejecting the Romans, but also fearing such a big city growing in their midst.
And so the angry Romans decided to use force.
To this end Romulus, after the sport was made ready, invited the neighbors to the spectacle. Many came together so that they could watch the game and see the new city.
All of the many Sabines with children and spouses came.

5b.
When the time came for the spectacle and all were fixed on the sport, then, when the signal was given, the Romans began to snatch the virgins.
The parents of the virgins escaped, crying out that the Romans violated the rules of hospitality.
The virgins having been snatched held neither hope for the better concerning themselves nor a less outrage.
But Romulus himself was going around and showing that it had been done because of the pride of the parents of the virgins.
"Although y'all are capture by strength," he said, "y'all have all the rights of Romans."
Now, the captured spirits were much less bothered.
Their parents stirred to arms the neighboring cities, to which the part of this injustice pertained to.
All of these neighbors were conquered by Romulus.

5c.
The more recent war rose up from the Sabines, which was the greatest.
The Sabines took the Roman citadel on the Capitoline mountain by a trick.
The Romans attempted to take the citadel the next day.
When Hostius Hostilius, general of the Roman army, died, at once the battle line of Rome was pushed back.
Romulus swore at the temple to Jupiter the Stayer and prayed for help.
Then, trusting that his prayers were heard, "hence," he said, "Romans, Jupiter best and greatest, orders us to halt and to renew the fight."
The Romans resisted as if [they were] commanded by the voice of the sky.
Then, the Sabines, the women once kidnapped, dared between the flying arrows to bring themselves, that they beg for peace from their fathers and husbands.
The generals, having been moved by this act,

5d.
not only make peace but also make one city out of two; also, they unite the royalty and so make Rome the seat of power.
Thus, because of the multitude growing, many were called Romans [those who are] out of Curibis, the city which was the head of the Sabines.
Then Romulus, when the population had been divided into 30 wards, gave the names of the captured women to the wards.
After several years Tatius from the Laurentines was taken. Romulus, after this, ruled alone.
*The favorable wars were waged during the following years with the Fidenaens and Veientians, by the Romans.
Romulus at that time reviewed the exercises in Camp Martio,

5e.
the weather having risen quickly concealed him in clouds.
The senators who were standing nearest said that the king was raised high.
Then, they yelled together, "Be well, god, having been born from god."
Afterwards, Romulus was said to have displayed himself to a certain citizen and to address him with these words:
"Report to the Romans that God to wish Rome to be the head of the world;
therefore, military affairs must be cultivated;
for, no human power is able to resist the Roman army."
Afterwards, the name Quirinus was given by Romulus.
He ruled for 37 years.

11a.
Afterward, L. Tarquinius began to reign, his last name was given as "Proud" because of his deeds.
The leaders of the senators, which had loved Servius, killed him.
With armed men he surrounded his own body.
He alone was exercising the decisions in capital cases by himself without the council.
So, he was able to kill, to lead into exile, and to plunder from goodness all who he was desiring.
Even if the previous rulers of the senate had been accustomed to consult on all things, Tarquinius by the advice of his household directed public affairs.
He made by himself war, peace, treaties, and alliances.
He was allying in particular the Latin clans to himself.
Although he already gave his sister in marriage to Octavius Mamilius Tusculanus, who was the longest ruler of the Latins.

11b.
Now, because the authority of Tarquinius was great among the Latin leaders, he called together a council on a certain day.
They meet crowded at first light.
In fact, Tarquinius himself kept the day, but he came a little before the falling of the sun. *Degree of Difference*
Turnus Herdonius Aricinius savagely had accused absent Tarquinius.
He said that Tarquinius tests the patience of the Latins and strives for power among them.
The king, after this was known, because in return on behalf of the empire he was not able to kill publicly Turnus, he decided immediately to oppress him by false accusation.
Therefore, on the next night, while Tarquinius was the leader of certain Aricians, who were enemy to Turnus, secretly brought in a great number of swords into their inn.

11c.
Tarquinius called to himself a little before sunrise the leaders of the Latins and made them surer about the swords which were hidden. *ablative of degree of difference*
"I knew," he said "Turnus wants to hold the power over Latins alone and now the death of all is prepared."
Then he led them to the inn.
When the swords from all sides of Turnus' house had been carried away, it seemed clear, Turnus was thrown in chains.
Immediately, the meeting of Latins is called together.
There the great outrage rose, as the swords were placed in the middle.
And so, Turnus, after his case was declared, was drowned in water in Ferentina.
The king, after his authority among the Latins increased in this way, renewed the treaty with them which was had been made by the previous king Tullus.

11d.
The Latins did not resist, although in this treaty the Roman state was superior.
For, the death of Turnus was teaching the power of Tarquinius and danger of whoever was resisting.
Tarquinius, although the king was unjust in peace, showed that as a leader of war nevertheless he was not bad.
He was first to wage war with the Volscians and take great spoils.
In another war with Gabii, a neighboring city, since he was not able to capture them by strength, by trickery and deceit by his son Sextus. Tarquinius attacked it.
For the sixth son of Tarquinius, who was the youngest of the three, passed Gabii, asking the Gabii violently about the intolerable cruelty of his father and so promising to help against the king.

11e.
The kindly Gabianians welcomed him, he was employed in the public council, and he is finally chosen.
Small battles were made between the Romans and Gabianians, in which Gabii was superior.
Sextus Tarquinius gave this to them as a gift so that they would trust [him] as a leader.
Then Sextus sent one of his men to Rome, so that he sought after orders from the father.
The king responded nothing with his voice, but he moved around as if considering things in the house's garden, although, the messenger from the sons followed him; here walking back and forth quietly among the tops of the head of the poppy plants chopping them.
The messenger, exhausted asking and waiting for a response, returned to Gabii and reported the amazing things.

11f.
Sextus understood what the father wanted to do.
Therefore, he killed the leaders of citizens by a variety of criminals.
The state of Gabii, having been so destroyed, was handed over to the Roman state by the council and help without weighty struggle.
After Gabii was taken, Tarquinius turned his attention toward the business of the city.
First, he decided to build a temple on Mount Tarpeian and to dedicat the whole mountain to Jupiter.
Now the father had vowed this previously.
For this work he used Etruscan engineers and laborers from the commoners of Rome.
The commoners also being lead over benches for other work in a circle made a Great Sewer dug under the earth, which even we could not see.
Many colonists were sent to Signia and Circeii, which would be for protection.

11g.
While they were led, he saw a terrible omen; snakes having slid out of the wooden columns they [the snakes] made haste and terror in the palace and the heart of the king was filled with anxious concern.
And so Tarquinius decided to send his sons, Titus and Arruns, to Delphi for great clarity in the land of the oracles.
The companion L. Junius Brutus was brought to them, out of Tarquinia, sister of the king, was born.
His nickname was prepared in this way; the king was being accustomed to kill the people which he was fearing, among them Brutus killed his brothers.
This one so that the king would see the cruelty, imitating the foolishness he was allowed to plunder goods and did not refuse the name Brutus.

11h.
***Then, accordingly, he was lead to Delphi away from the sons of Tarquinius, the object of mockery more truly than the companion.
Although, he held the gift from Apollo, a golden staff was enclosed in a staff of cornel wood, as if the statue of his character.
Afterwards, the young men went to Delphi from their father and they finished what was ordered, they decided to ask from the oracle to who of them would come the kingship.
The voice was rendered: "He will have the great empire of Rome who is first among you, oh boys, he will kiss the mother."
The sons of Tarquius, despising Brutus, between them they let the right of kissing the mother at Rome to fates.
Brutus, who in all measures interpreted the oracle, fell on the land and kissed it, of course, because this is the common mother of all mortals.
Then, the young men returned to Rome.

14a and 14b.
Lars Porsena, because the building for protection was put on Janiculum, the camp was set up on the banks of the Tiber.
When Gaius Mucius, the noble young man, had approached the senate, "To cross the Tiber," he said, "Senators, and to enter, if I could, I wish [to do these things] the camp of the enemy."
The senators approved, and Mucius set out.
There, while, by chance, the payment for the military of the Etruscans was given to them, although, a scribe, was sitting closely to the king with similar fancy clothes.
Mucius killed the scribe instead of the king and immediately was grabbed.
When the king, terrified by danger, if all the plots against the king are not revealed, he ordered Mucius to be given to the fire,
Mucius placed his right hand in the fire kindling for sacrifice.
The king, astonished, lept from his seat and ordered the youth to be moved from the altar.
Porsena marveled at his [Mucius] virtue and "Untouched and unharmed," he said, "from here I will dismiss you."
Mucius, to whom afterwards the nickname of Lefty was given, ambassadors from Porsena followed [him] to Rome and there they carried the stipulations for peace.
